[MUSIC]
>> Kyle Simpson: We started with basically
not a lot of assumption about functional
programming and we observed side effects.
Side effects are when
a function does something
in addition to it's direct effect.
And in addition to it]s direct return
value it has some other effect.
And that can be as simple as
printing something the console, or
as complicated as changing some state,
changing some variable,
in the other parts of our program.
That's complicated not because if that
function relies on that variable,
we have to know, how many times
the function's been called to be able to
predict its outcome, but it's also
complicated because if there's a variable
hanging out in free space,
that our function's relying upon,
somebody else can change that variable and
change out from underneath.
It's like pulling the rug out from
underneath you, changing what you expect.
So that's one of the fundamental
motivations for functional programming,
is to eliminate all that complexity
by doing what we call what?
>> Kyle Simpson: What's the opposite
of these side effect functions?
>> Speaker 2: Pure.
>> Kyle Simpson: Pure functions.
Pure functions operate only on
the stuff that they were given.
They have a direct return
result if necessary.
So they don't have any side
effects in the outside world,
which means all of that complexity that
I just talked about becomes a non issue.
Can you write an entirely pure program?
Yeah, theoretically, yeah.
It's gonna do anything?
Not observable.
[LAUGH] The fundamental definition
of observation is a side effect.
So we're gonna have to have
some sort of cheat in there,
and as we talk about functional
programming languages, they have for
example, in Haskell,
they call it the IMO nav.
It’s a special exception in there
that allows you to do some IO in
a nonfunctional or non-pure way.
>> Kyle Simpson: In JavaScript,
we have a lot more freedom.
Languages like Scala are the same way,
more freedom, we can choose as much or
how little of functional
programming we wrap in.
So after we talked about pure functions,
we talked about composing
functions together.
So if you had an impure function
you can wrap a function around it,
produce a pure interface.
And now you've preserved the notion of
purity and we pass in the universe.
And then we can compose multiple
pure functions together.
By instead of assigning the end result to
some variable that some state that can be
changed, simply calling the result of that
and passing it into some other function.
And we can do that manually
by the call signature, or
we can create compositional patterns that
we know will take two functions, and
compose them in some specific way.
So we talked about,
I called it composed two a way to
specifically compose to functions and
assume two parameters to each one.
So that's one way of
defining a composition plan.
After we talked about composition
we moved in immutability.
We talked about not only
immutable bindings.
And immutable values but more importantly,
the usage of values in
an immutably sufficient way.
So we had utilities that could produce
a list that was changed in place or
produce a whole new list.
We actually started to see
that in JavaScript didn't we?
We saw the difference with
something like slice,
that doesn't change the array in place,
it produces a new array, a new list,
that's a subset of the previous list.
So using the principles of immutable
values, we create a new value every time
we create a new list every time
rather than mutating a list in place.
After we talked about immutability,
we moved into a discussion of closure.
Closure being a way to wrap state around,
wrap a value,
some state in a function and
then that function can move around and
any time we call that function,
we can get that state back out.
Then we talked about recursion.
Different ways of using recursion.
Then we moved into our list operation.
And I hope by this point you now have
all those little fundamental legos.
Those building blocks.
So start using some of the principles
of functional programming.
But without being overburdened by all
the traditional academic terminology and
understanding.
That is not to disparage those things and
to say,
that functional programming is bad.
I think it's fantastic.
I've been at this 17 years and
every time I have tried to learn
it from that path, I've failed.
I failed to be able to
understand all that terminology.
And so at some point, I said,
can I get some of the benefits here, but
just kind of in a basic way?
And that's where functional
light programming comes from.
So hopefully, that's another tool that
you can add to your bag of tricks.
And it should be something
that you can compose
into more sophisticated understandings
as you continue your learning path.
Are there any other questions
that we can answer?
Before we wrap up this workshop.
>> Kyle Simpson: Not a single one?
Maybe it's that afternoon lull,
all that good Thai food, okay.
Well it's been an honor teaching you
about functional light programming,
I hope that you will experiment
with some of these things.
If you have any thoughts or feedback,
again this is my contact info,
I'd love for you to reach out for that.
So we'll call it a rap.
Thank you very much.